June 15, 2015
Hillary Clinton Calls for Universal Preschool For America’s Children


QUESTION:  How do you do?  I'm Jackie Cowell (ph).  And like many of you, I'm looking around the audience and I'm seeing many of you, that like me you've been working on this for 20 or 30 years.  So thank you for your perseverance on early childhood education out there.  And the children that you met this morning are likely to graduate from high school in 2030.  So just think about what 2030 is going to be looking like.  When I was in high school, our class took a field trip to see a computer.  (Laughter.)  I don't think they do that anymore.
 
But it's really going to be, they're likely to retire in the 2080s, so how do you prepare them for this very complex world they're going to inherit?  And many of them will hold jobs that haven't been invented yet.  So it's really working on these skills, as you talked about, early childhood education, and we're thrilled that this discourse is now part of the presidential primary, that early childhood education is being talked about and making sure every child has the opportunity to reach their full potential.
 
And here in New Hampshire, things have been tough for families, trying to make ends meet, trying to make sure they can get into childcare that is quality, that really helps them reach their full potential.  And there are too many families that aren't able to do that because of the difference of the cost.
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  You know, Jackie, I think that's a great perspective to put on it, because when we talk about early childhood, we think about the little kids, like the ones that we were with in the class room.  But we ought to have a broader perspective and think about the adults they will become.  And what kind of adults do we need?  We need people who will have exactly the skills for jobs that haven't been invented, and we'll have the temperament and the character and the attributes to get along with people, to respect the law, respect each other, to be part of building a stronger, more prosperous America.
 
And I think it's a great perspective if you kind of work backwards and you say to yourself, okay, what are you going to look for in somebody who wants to be a worker and a citizen in 15, 20, 30 years?  You know that that really starts so importantly at the beginning.
 
QUESTION:  Thank you so much for being here this morning and for this discussion.  I'm Marylou Beaver (ph) from Rochester.  I'm not here this morning representing an organization, but as someone who was in the field for more than 25 years as a teacher, as a center director and as a center owner here in Rochester.
 
I also was a mom who was dependent upon childcare for my children as I suddenly found myself a single mom and was in school trying to continue my education so that I could do more and provide more for my family.  Having quality childcare education, early education for my kids was so important to me because I was in and out so much of the time when I really wanted to be spending time with them, and wanted to give them all that I could.  But as so many parents today are facing, you need to work the hours that you have to work in order to support your family.
 
And it's very important that we have not only the accessibility and the quality, but the affordability for all families.  Do you agree?
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  Oh, I do agree.  And I think your story is really important for everybody to hear because that is the reality that is going on right now.  I just meet so many working parents, and particularly single working moms who are struggling.  They are really working as hard as they can, as you were, and many of them trying to go to school at the same time, because they know they'll have a better future if they do.
 
I remember when I was teaching law at the University of Arkansas, oh, gosh, back in the early 1970s, I met so many people around the campus who were single parents trying to go to school, and childcare was their biggest obstacle.  And we started a fund, called the Arkansas Single Parent Scholarship Fund, because it wasn't the money that they needed so much for the tuition, although that was a stretch, it was all the other expenses that surrounded the difficulty of them being able to get their education.
 
And I think you have to look at what young families are going through today in a very comprehensive way and say, okay, what can the extended family do?  What can the houses of worship, our churches do?  What can communities do?  What can the Y do, or the Boys and Girls Club?  There's so many different ways to kind of piece this together.  But there isn't any way to get to a universal program unless our government in Washington sees it as a priority to partner with many of the states and localities.  We have the Mayor here, thank you for being here, Mayor, so that we can provide the backstop and the support that is necessary.
 
And it is particularly important for the youngest kids, the zero to three kids, because those are kids who need a lot more personal attention.  Bill and I are exhausted every time we take care of Charlotte.  We love every minute of it, but it reminds you how hard it is to raise babies and keep an eye on them as they take off on their own.  So I think it is important that we do everything we can to deal with that zero to three age group, and that's going to take more direction.
 
That's why I mentioned the Early Head Start Childcare Partnership and the Early Head Start Program.  But, again, we need more people to help fill that space because that's often where parents really are stretched, and we also don't have a lot of time off for a lot of working parents.  And so just getting everything organized when you have that new baby is a challenge, don't you think?
 
QUESTION:  Absolutely.  As a grandmother, I can certainly relate to the exhaustion.  The other concern that I had as a center director was the wages that we were able to pay to our educators.  We know that consistent quality educators are so important to young children as they are growing and learning, but we can't always keep them because of the wages that are paid.
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  Well, that's why I said I'm going to offer a middle class tax cut that can go toward helping parents pay for quality childcare because you've put your finger on one of the biggest problems.  A lot of parents cannot afford quality childcare, and a lot of the teachers and the childcare workers can't afford to live on what the parents can pay.
 
So you have a perfect storm where we need quality childcare, but how are we going to get the people with the continuity so that the experience is there to be able to deliver that childcare when parents can't go any further.  They're stretched as far as they can get.  And I have been meeting with childcare workers, and a lot of them just throw up their hands.  They'd rather go be a food server for the money, but not for the reward that they have gotten from taking care of kids.  They're making $8-9-10 an hour for often 12-hour days.  And that is just a huge burden on them and their families.  And so then you have a downward spiral.
 
Is that what you've seen, too?
 
QUESTION:  It is.  There's a saying that parents can't afford to pay, teachers can't afford to stay.  There's got to be a better way.  And so it's the worthy wage campaign, that's their saying.
 
And so here in New Hampshire, we've actually, with the Department of Education, Department of Health and Human Services and our Governor's office, applied for two federal grants hoping to really show what we could do in early childhood education, so the Race to the Top Early Learning Challenge Grant and the Preschool Development Grant, and we didn't get them.
 
And one of the reasons, we're the only New England state that didn't get the Race to the Top Grant, because we've been divesting instead of investing.  And so what we found also, talking with business leaders, that this is not a Red or a Blue issue, that people really genuinely care about making sure every child has that opportunity.
 
So here in New Hampshire we're really seeing that starting to come, but we haven't gotten those grants and we'd like to.
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  Well, I want to throw it open for -- I know there are a lot of people in this audience, who care deeply about this issue, have their own experience in doing the issue.  And so, Julie, I think we should see if somebody else wants to contribute to the conversation.
 
MODERATOR:  Do we have any questions from the audience?
 
Here, there is a microphone coming.
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  There is a roving microphone.
 
QUESTION:  Thank you.  My granddaughter is here.  What are you going to do for the grandparents that are raising these children?  My generation, all of my friends are raising their grandchildren.
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  Can I ask you, without -- I don't want to impinge on your privacy, what are the circumstances under which you're raising your grandchildren and your friends are?
 
QUESTION:  She was either going to be turned over to the state, because of addiction, so --
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  I have to tell you this is -- thank you, thank you.  I'm so, so sorry.  But you are the second grandmother in New Hampshire who has said that to me.  And that's one of the reasons why if you have followed my campaign, because of what I've been hearing, because I have spent two months listening to people, because I do think it's important when you want to represent the entire country you actually listen to what's happening in people's lives.  And substance abuse and addiction is ravaging families all over the country.  And I heard it first in Iowa.  And then as soon as I got to New Hampshire I was sitting down in Keene, New Hampshire talking to some people, first thing a retired doctor said what are you going to do about the heroin epidemic in New Hampshire?
 
I'm first of all going to talk a lot about it, because we need to drag it out of the shadows, we need to hold it up to the light.  (Applause.)  And it is heartbreaking, because there has not been an event I've gone to where somebody hasn't come up to me, sometimes bravely, like you did in public and sometimes just privately taking me aside to talk to me about it, that and mental health problems that go untreated.  (Applause.) 
 
So I would say three things.  First I think you're very brave and very loving to take on this responsibility.  (Applause.)  And you should know that every time you think about how hard it is and your grandchildren will be really better off, because their grandmother stepped in and said I'm here for you and I will take care of you.  (Applause.)
 
Secondly, we have to extend every program, every tax break, everything we do to people taking care of kids, whether they are parents, or they are grandparents, or maybe in some cases older siblings, or aunts or uncles, because of the inability of a child's parents to be able to do so.  So whatever I propose you will be eligible for, people who are taking care of their grandchildren.  (Applause.)
 
Right now you can't get any help in most places and we have to change that, we have to face the reality.  I mean when you're -- look, we were just laughing about my eight-month-old is beginning to heave herself around in the resemblance of a crawl.  But, once she takes off and we're chasing her around and trying to keep her hands out of the outlets and all the things you have to do with little kids, grandparents who are raising their kids, and there are millions of them, need more help.
 
When I was a Senator I championed a program in New York City to have a special form of housing for grandmothers raising their kids, because they needed, in my view, the support of a community, because it can be really isolating.  Most of your friends they're not raising babies, toddlers, or school-age kids.  So you need the support of a broader community to help you with that.  And you need the support that any parent would get, because that's what you're doing.  You're parenting.
 
So I can tell you that I will do everything I can, both in any benefit that I think the country should extend to raising children, you will be eligible, but also to the idea of how do we provide support for you and for other grandmothers, because it's predominantly grandmothers.  There are some grandfathers, predominantly grandmothers, too.
 
QUESTION:  But, it is changing.  My friends, I have half-a-dozen.
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  You have half-a-dozen friends.
 
QUESTION:  Yes.
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  No, I mean who are raising their children.  Yes, and do you support each other?
 
QUESTION:  Absolutely.
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  Okay.  That's important.  You need to support each other, because you need to get that emotional support and the hints and the tips, like somebody finds out something that will work for them it may work for you.  So thank you for raising that, and thank you for saying that.
 
MODERATOR:  Thank you.
 
Next question over here.
 
QUESTION:  Hi, early childhood education is a great foundation, but I have a 14-year-old.  So what are your plans for education in general?  The state of education today is horrendous, especially for children with ADHD.  You know, you're looking at cookie cutter classrooms and these kids don't learn that way.  So what types of plans do you have for them?
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  Well, this is one of the key issues about how we do more to adapt our school system to spark the ability to learn in every kind of kid, because kids learn differently.  Some kids can sit there and absorb the teacher's lessons.  Some kids need to move.  Some kids need to have practical experience.  And I do think we have erred in trying to channel every kid into one form of learning.  And I don't think that -- I don't think that works for every kid and especially for kids who are hyperactive, kids who need to be channeled and directed, but also need to be able to get rid of some of that extra energy that they've got.
 
I don't know how you expect to eliminate everything from recess to gym to extra-curricular activities during the school day and not have a lot of kids unable to concentrate and a lot of kids unable to really absorb the lessons you're trying to teach.  So the specific issue about ADHD kids is we need to make sure we have the best possible diagnosis and treatment, because we are medicating lots of kids.  And I think we have to ask ourselves are we medicating those kids because they have a medical condition that needs to be medicated, and the answer is yes some do, no doubt about it, but are we medicating kids because we've not yet figured out how to better deal with their particular needs.  And that starts in the family, because it's hard for a lot of families, but it also goes into the schools.
 
So part of what I will be talking about in the campaign is how do we get our schools and doing so by respecting our teachers, who are on the front lines of trying to help kids -- (applause) -- and trying to figure out how works for different kinds of kids.  And I don't think a cookie cutter approach works.  I want every kid to do well in school.  I want every kid to get the skills that that kid needs.  I think we made an error when we eliminated in high school, in most high schools, technical education, what we used to call vocational education.  (Applause.)  I think there are -- we're going to need a lot of jobs that are good jobs by people who can do work that is not just academic work.  It is work that they learned to do by doing.
 
And then I was in a community college here, New Hampshire Technical Institute, talking to the people there, and there were students who were taking courses who were in high school.  That's one way of doing it, having kind of a group of high schools send their kids to a technical institute if they're interested.  I went to one in Iowa where young kids were learning how to be machinists.  They were juniors and seniors in high school.  And the ones who were seniors had jobs lined up, starting to pay like $40,000, because they were coming out as a certified machinist.  Well, we need to make that available for more kids.
 
And look, I'm not a scientist.  (Laughter.)  But, unlike a lot of the candidates on the other side I actually listen to scientists.  (Laughter/applause.)  And one of the things that I will try to do, by partnering, not by mandating and directing, out partnering with our educators, partnering with people who have experience like our folks here, is to figure out, okay, how do we get more hands-on learning, because I do believe that for kids, especially ADHD kids, doing something, not trying to sit still, which is really hard, but getting up and learning, going from machine to machine to figure out how it works if that's their interest.  So we're going to take a hard look at all of that.
 
But education is a local and state matter, but I think if we do a better job looking at all the research about what actually produces the best results then we can come up with some incentive programs and some encouragement that will begin to try, once again, to get our education system to respond to the real needs that a whole variety of kids have.
 
QUESTION:  Thank you.
 
MODERATOR:  Someone in the back.
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  Here comes the mike.
 
QUESTION:  Thank you.  We spend so much money on the military and we're able to get the money just like this, but nationwide our schools are not equal and they're not of the same standards.  So why are we not making a priority nationwide per state on education as much as spending on other things.  And the military is important, I do realize that.
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  Yes.
 
QUESTION:  Thank you.
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  Education has been principally a state responsibility and a local responsibility.  And it really wasn't until 30, 50 years ago really, I guess back in the 1960s, when the government began to put in a lot more money from the federal government into education.  And the original idea behind the federal government putting money in was to try to equalize spending so that kids in poor districts would have a better chance to get the same resources and the same quality of teachers and all that, which I think is still very important.  So that it was an equity argument, some of you know Title 1.  The Elementary Secondary Education Act was really designed to do that.
 
Then in the Reagan administration, I think it was 19 -- I want to remember here, '83 or so, there was a report that came out called A Nation at Risk.  And it compared our educational outcomes with comparable countries, mostly European, some Asian, and basically said, you know, our kids are not keeping up, they're not performing.  And that was really a big change, the Reagan administration began saying, okay, well, the federal government has to do more to try to change the way we're educating and that went on and certainly President George W. Bush with no child left behind it was certainly well-motivated.  I was in the Senate.  I know the arguments that were made.  And it was to try to create a system where no matter who you were, where you went to school, you'd have the same expectations about how you were going to achieve.
 
Now, I say all of this, because we've always spent money on our military, depending upon who is in and who is out, greater or lesser amounts, but always the biggest part of the budget other than Social Security, Medicare, et cetera.  So I think that your question is a fair one, like what are our priorities.  We will always have to have the strongest, best equipped military, but even there we have to save money, we have to be smart about it.  We have to look for ways to get more done efficiently.  And just like every other part of government it needs to be looked at hard, so that we don't just send money without getting the results that we need.  And there are a lot of issues in procurement and in other areas around military equipment and expenditures that really need to be cleaned up, streamlined, and made less expensive without sacrificing quality.
 
So I think that it's time in our country and in my speech on Saturday I said we have to reform our government.  We have to take a hard look at everything.  We have to bring it into the 21st Century.  Now, our military equipment is 22nd Century.  I mean it's more advanced than anybody anywhere.  But, we're also fighting wars where a lot of what we've paid a lot of money for is no longer applicable.  I mean we're dealing with different kinds of threats.  We're dealing with cyber-threats.  We're dealing with irregular warfare and terrorism.  So we've got to adjust how we fund even defense, but we have to always fund it to the extent that we need to get the outcomes we're looking for.
 
But, on education we've put more federal dollars in, but to go back to the question about ADHD, we need to take a hard look about what's working and what's not working.  I just want to give you -- I'm going to roll out a whole education proposal, too, but I'm going to give you a quick understanding of what I mean.  Everybody believes, and I'm guilty of this, that we're an expert about education, because we went to school.  And those of us who are parents, we had kids in school, so we think we've got it all figured out.  We know what worked or didn't work for us, and therefore we kind of translate that into what will or won't work for other people.
 
Look, there's a lot of truth to that.  People -- your experience matters and how you experienced school matters.  But, I think research really counts.  So there's a team of researchers, I know they're based at Harvard, but other schools have been involved, and they went through all of the work that's been done.  They said, okay, what makes for a great school?  And they came out with some things that are simple, but hard to do and hard to pay for, things like a longer school year, particularly for disadvantaged kids.  We have so much research it matters, because for many of us in this room summer time you give your kids new experiences, maybe they go to the Y camp.  I was talking to one of the people here who runs the camps.  Maybe you take them on trips where they go to museums.  But, for a lot of kids they actually lose learning over the summer.
 
So here the teachers have worked and worked, and parents have reinforced the messages in many instances, then they lose ground.  So they start the school year a little behind in some areas than where they ended the school year.  So a longer school year for a lot of kids makes a lot of sense.
 
A longer school day for a lot of kids makes a lot of sense, because if you have kids, particularly in the preteen, early teen years and they get out of school before parents get home from work, that is one of the worst times of the day for kids to get themselves in trouble, and all kinds of trouble, and bad influences.  Well, you know, the parents are working, oftentimes again they have no options, so longer day, longer school day.
 
More support for preparing for teachers so that they can share what works with each other.  Now that sounds so simple, but it is so critical.  Okay, what worked in your classroom?  I tried this lesson, it didn't work, let's take another look at it.  And what we've done instead is to disempower experienced teachers, and instead basically try to lay on top of tem all of these tests, and all of these standards.  I believe in both, always have, but you can get to a point of diminishing returns.  Too many and really all you're doing is like running on the hamster wheel instead of figuring out what does this kid need?  What's the diagnosis for this kids' problem?  How do we deal with it?
 
And then, finally, let's not forget the role that parents play and families play in helping a kid succeed in school.  So having more interaction between the school and the home, even if it's a phone call, even if it's an e-mail exchange, even better if it's regular visits, because if parents don't understand what their kids are supposed to be learning and they don't reinforce it, it's really hard for teachers to make that case.
 
So I think that we can do a better job in using the money we spend on education more effectively, and trying to figure out where at the state and local levels more expenditures would make a difference.  And I'm very open to that because it breaks my heart that in a lot of poor districts right now, those poor schools have lost every extracurricular activity.  They don't have sports teams anymore.  They don't have bands.  They don't have plays.  They don't have a lot of the things that you remember from school, and that for many kids gave them their first taste of success.
 
So when you cut out all of those programs, and you just say, you've got to do well on these tests that are taught in a certain way to be learned in a certain way, a lot of kids are not going to be able to grasp that and do well.  But if you give them more options, more responsibility, and more support for those places that need it, then I think we can get better outcomes, personally as well as academically.  So that’s what I want to see us do more of.  (Applause.)
 

MODERATOR:  Thank you.  We have time for one more question.  The lady in the back in the polka dot.
 
QUESTION:  Thank you for mentioning that you listen to scientists, because I happen to be one of them.
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  Excellent.
 
QUESTION:  So I'm a mom and an expert that way, but also I am a research psychologist, and studying creativity and studying social and emotional learning, especially in schools.  And one thing that you mentioned also was that we want to prepare kids, and I completely agree with you, for the jobs of tomorrow that we don't know what they're going to be.  We don't know what they are going to be, and the central skill that we need to teach them and enable is creativity.
 
However, we seem to also do one more thing is compare ourselves to places like China, and our education is turning into worksheet-based education.  Only we are drilling kids, and art is disappearing, music is disappearing, even in considerably rich schools where I live in Portsmouth, art is once a week, music is once a week, that's it.  And it's all about tests and it's all about sitting, even in kindergarten, I have heard stories from kindergartners who come home crying after test in kindergarten.
 
So can we try to compare ourselves also to places like Finland that do not start formal education until age seven.  (Applause.)  They let kids play.
 
SEC. HILLARY CLINTON:  You make a great point.  If people are really interested in following up on the points that she made, we don't compare ourselves to China.  But it is stressing to me when China invests in preschool opportunities for kids and we don't because if you look at the highest performing nations, Finland is usually at the top.  They have early childhood education.  They have paid leave.  They have support for families.  And, yes, they don't start school until kids are seven, but those kids have not just been wandering around fending for themselves.  They've been in organized settings, predominantly family-based but not exclusively.
 
And if you look at the other countries, the best comparisons are to what are called the OECD countries.  So if you're interested in Googling that and looking, they do a very thorough educational survey every few years, and they lay out what's working and what's not working.
 
And I absolutely agree that creativity, you cannot expect kids to be creative if you don't let them play.  Now playing is a learning experience, and in preschool it should be, in kindergarten is should be.  (Applause.)  That doesn't mean they can't be learning at the same time.
 
And this debate that we're having seems to me to be so beside the point.  It's not like either play or learn, through play that is supervised in preschool, you will learn, if it's done right.  That's why we want quality preschool, right?  And so it's a way of unleashing creativity and allowing little kids' personalities to develop.
 
In the classroom where I just was, I was handed this book of drawings.  Each of the kids did a drawing about what they want to be when they grow up.  And they want to be a firefighter.  They want to be an artist.  They want to be a vet.  They want to be hairstylist.  I mean, it was everything you could imagine.  But that's the beginning of them thinking about, envisioning adulthood.
 
So the teachers here, they look at that and they'll talk about what it would mean to be a vet, or gee why do you want to be a hairstylist, what does that mean to you, or what kind of artist do you want to be?  That is just as important as anything else you can do in the classroom.  And so I think that the reaction against all the testing is coming from people who believe that we have to hold accountable what happens in our school, we can't just say it doesn't matter whether kids learn anything.  That's not acceptable.
 
But we have to get back to thinking about the different ways kids learn, and creativity -- the best gift you can give a child is a creative, open learning mind that will enable that child to pursue his or her own dreams to live up to his or her own God-given potential.  And that potential may (cheers/applause) may not at all be the same by anybody else's.
 
So I want to give our two guests, if I can, the chance for the last word, because they've been on the front lines.