@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@Clinton: Climate Change is One of the Most 'Urgent Threats of Our Time@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@

“Thank you so very much.  Thank you.  Thanks for the great tour, which I really appreciated having the chance to look around this impressive building and learning about everything that is being done here.  The DART Central Station a LEED Platinum certified building.  That’s the highest rating available, and so everyone who contributed to that, I really applaud.
 
“As Elizabeth was saying, the numbers are impressive: A quarter of the construction materials were recycled.  More than a million gallons of rainwater have been cleaned and reused, leading to big savings in water consumption.  Rooftop solar panels have reduced carbon emissions and saved money.  78 geothermal wells were dug and are now producing the energy for heating and cooling.
 
“There is just so much to admire in this building and what it stands for, and it’s the kind of innovation and progress we want to see all over America. 
 
“It’s good for our economy, good for the health of our families and communities, and yes, good for our planet.
 
“Now, I know there are still people who would rather not hear this.  Some deny climate change exists at all.  Others throw up their hands and say, “Sorry, I’m not a scientist.” 
 
“Well, I’m not a scientist either.  That’s why I think it’s important to listen to scientists.  It’s important to heed the warnings based on extensive scientific research to see what’s going on here in our own country and certainly around the world.
 
“The reality of climate change is unforgiving—no matter what the deniers say.    Sea levels are rising.  Ice caps are melting.  Storms, wildfires, and extreme weather are wreaking havoc.
 
“This is one of the most urgent threats of our time, and we have no choice but to rise and meet it.
 
“Now, just as this challenge is enormous, so are the opportunities it presents.
 
“Here in Iowa, you’ve already moved past the old, false choices between protecting our environment and growing the economy.  Instead you are thriving by doing both. 
 
“Iowa is leading the nation in wind energy.  This year, for the first time, Iowa is producing roughly a third of your total electricity from renewables.   And as I like to say as I travel around the country, if Iowa can do it, so can the rest of the country!  Look to Iowa to see how this can work.
 
“With leadership from President Obama, and the ingenuity of entrepreneurs and innovators across our country, we are on our way to a clean energy future. 
 
“We’re showing the world there is no challenge too great for America to tackle. 
 
“But we have to do even more.  And we need to do it now.  So on day one as President, I will set two ambitious national goals for renewable energy.
 
“First, we need to have more than half a billion solar panels installed across the country by the end of my first term.
 
“Second, we’ll set a 10-year goal of generating enough renewable energy to power every single home in America.
 
“Not some homes.  Not most homes.  Every home in America.
 
“Now, I know these goals will test our capacities, but I know they are within our reach.
 
“And we’re all going to have to do our part.  But that’s who we are as Americans.  We don’t hide from change; we harness it.
 
“And over the next few months, I will lay out a comprehensive agenda for meeting these national goals and going even further to address the broader climate challenge. 
 
“We will make America the world’s clean energy superpower. 
 
“We will develop and deploy the clean energy technologies of the future.  Transform our grid to give Americans more control over the energy they produce and consume.  And yes, I will defend President Obama’s Clean Power Plant—Clean Power Plan against attacks from Republicans and their corporate backers.
 
“We’ll launch a Clean Energy Challenge that supports and partners with states, cities, and rural communities that are ready to lead on clean energy.
 
“We’ll stop the giveaways to big oil companies and extend, instead, tax incentives for clean energy, while making them more cost-effective for both taxpayers and producers.
 
“We’ll support—and improve—the Renewable Fuel Standard that has been such a success for Iowa and much of rural America.
 
“And even as we face the threat of climate change head on, we cannot close our eyes to the challenges facing hard-working families in Coal Country, who kept our lights on and our factories running for more than a century.  We should guarantee that coal miners and their families get the benefits they’ve earned and the respect they deserve.
 
“We also have to mobilize an unprecedented global commitment to reduce carbon emissions around the world.  And I know firsthand from my time as Secretary of State that America’s ability to lead the world on this issue hinges on our commitment to act ourselves.  No country will fall in line just because we tell them to.  They need to see us taking significant steps of our own.
 
“The decisions we make in the next decade can make all of this possible or they can keep us trapped in the past. 
 
“I refuse to turn my back on what is one of the greatest threats and greatest opportunities America faces.  I refuse to let those who are deniers, who disagree with what we need to do to rip away all the progress we’ve made and leave our country exposed to the most severe consequences of climate change.  America needs to lead this fight, not go MIA.
 
“That’s why I’m announcing these goals today.  It’s why over the course of this campaign, I’m going to keep this challenge front and center.  And it’s why, as President, I’ll do everything I can to lead us toward that clean energy future and to work with partners in the state and local level who are doing exactly what we see here in this station and what is being done across Iowa.   That’s the kind of positive partnership that I think we need to have and that I will promote and make possible as President.
 
“Now, I’m happy to answer some questions.”

