June 15, 2015
Hillary Clinton Calls for Universal Preschool For America’s Children


Thank you.  Oh, I am thrilled to be here and to be in such a beautiful facility, having just had the chance to spend a little time with some children, mostly four year olds but a few five year olds.  It was great. 
 
And I thank Julie and the entire team here at the Y.  I'm such a big believer in this kind of partnership.  And I was thrilled, as Julie was talking about it, to see the applause break out on behalf of this YMCA and all that it does.
 
This is for me a very important place to be to talk about a really critical issue, one that, as Julie has said, I have spent much of my adult life being committed to and concerned about.  And I can't think of a better place to do this than here in New Hampshire, a state that will always have a special place in my heart.  (Cheers, applause.)
 
I had a great event Saturday in a perfect place on a perfect day on Roosevelt Island in New York City at the Four Freedoms Park that was constructed in honor of President Roosevelt. 
 
And I was able to talk about the four fights that I want to wage and win on behalf of the American people.  They to me really encapsulate what my campaign is about, but also what our country needs to do together:  build an economy for tomorrow not yesterday, strengthen America's families because when our families are strong America is strong, harness all of our power not just the military but diplomatic and economic, to use our values to lead the world, and to revitalize our democracy here at home, particularly by focusing on getting dark, unaccountable money out of politics, even if it takes a constitutional amendment.  (Cheers, applause.)
 
And I will be rolling out specific policies over the weeks to come, but I do believe with all my heart that everything we need to do in our country really starts with how we treat our children and how we try to raise them, taking care of their needs, being able to stimulate them, to give them a better chance in life, helping them become successful and good citizens.
 
And for me all of this does come back to our kids.  That's because my mother, who was with me in New Hampshire in 2008, really taught me that everybody needs a chance and everybody needs a champion.  (Applause.)
 
And for her she knew what it was like not to have either when she was growing up, because she was abandoned very young by her parents and sent to live with grandparents who didn't want her, so that by the time she was 14 she was out on her own working as a housemaid and a babysitter in another family's home.'
 
And I didn't know any of this when I was growing up, when I was the age of the kids we were reading The Very Hungry Caterpillar to.  I just knew she was my mom, and she was great, and she was fun, and she taught me so much.  And she made grilled cheese and tomato soup sandwiches.  I mean, there was just a wonderful sense of being loved and taken care of, but also being inspired.
 
And I remember asking her when I got old enough to kind of piece together some of the answers to questions I was getting about her childhood, how could she do this?  And her answer was very simple:  You know, kindness along the way from people that cared about her and showed her she mattered, the first grade teacher who saw she had nothing to eat for lunch, and without embarrassing her started bringing extra food, and then would lean over and whisper, "Dorothy, I brought too much food today, would you like some?  I can't eat it all." 
 
Or even the woman whose house she went to work in, she wanted so much to go to high school but she knew she had to do the chores that were necessary.  And so the woman said, "Well, if you can get your chores done you can go to high school."  And that was a great gift that my mother was forever grateful for.
 
Because those people believed in her, she believed in me.  You know, there is a direct link, if we believe in our children, we instill in them the belief that they are worth something, and then they in turn can pass that on.
 
Now, ideally, we all hope that families can do that, but in today's world it's really hard for many families to do everything they're expected to do under the stresses that they face. 
 
Because of her I believe in the potential of every American and particularly every American child.  And when our children succeed, America succeeds.
 
So I've been a champion for early childhood education for as long as I can remember, really starting when I was in law school, and got interested in, as I was studying the law, why do some people follow the law and other people don't?  What's in their background?  What makes them either a productive member of society or somebody on the outside who may be trying to tear down instead of build up?
 
And that's why I'm putting this front and center in my campaign, because I think it's time we realize once and for all that investing in our children is one of the best investments our country can make.  (Applause.)
 
Now, I think most of us kind of intuitively have known that, but now research is telling us how much early learning in the first five years of life can impact lifelong success.
 
So we have to help parents be their children's first teachers, from that very first day, and we have to help them get access to quality affordable childcare and preschool. 
And for me it's recognizing the reality of today's families.  Forty percent of the breadwinners, the principal breadwinners in America today are women.  We have a lot of single moms, heroically trying to raise kids under sometimes very challenging circumstances.  We have a lot of two-parent families where people are working nightshifts, they're overlapping, they are just doing everything they can, sometimes with multiple jobs, to keep body and soul together and put that food on the table and that roof over the head.
 
Today's parents have to juggle so much.  They have to squeeze every minute out of every 24 hour day.
 
And that just makes the argument even stronger as to why we have to have their backs, why we have to be there to help them do the best job they can possibly do.
 
Yes, they need to do the job that pays them, but at the end of the day, the job raising children, taking care of your family, caring even for your parents as they age, is the most important job any of us will ever do.  And we don't do it for pay, we do it for love, we do it for a sense of giving back, but let's try to figure out how to make it a little bit easier.    (Applause.)
 
You know, I met a woman a couple weeks ago who was trying to do everything she could imagine to make it work.  She was a single mom.  She was raising three kids.  She was working and she was going to community college because she was trying to get ahead so that she could get a better job.  She said, "You know, I don't ask for anything, but why does it have to be so hard?" 
 
I hear that question all over:  Why does it have to be so hard?
 
It's hard enough to pay for any preschool or childcare at all, let alone the quality programs that help kids develop and flourish.  Funding for these opportunities has not kept up with changing times and rising demand.
 
So it's not surprise that out-of-pocket childcare costs for families have soared by nearly 25 percent the past decade.  In many states it costs more for childcare of quality than it costs for college tuition.  And we know what's happened at that end of the learning curve.
 
We actually did make a lot of progress expanding preschool attendance for three and four year olds during the 1990s.  I was honored to hold the first ever White House conference on early childhood development, to bring together people like those you see here.  (Applause.)
 
But starting in 2001 there's been almost no progress.  Only 55 percent of all of America's three and four-year olds are enrolled in preschool.  And meanwhile, many of our economic competitors are racing ahead.  They are making big investments in preschool and early education.
 
I'll tell you a little story.  You know, I spent a lot of time as Secretary of State trying to figure out how we were going to deal with the rise of China.  It's going to be one of the biggest problems for the next president.  And there are a lot of aspects to it. 
 
But I was not surprised to get a call about two years ago, shortly after I left the State Department, on behalf of the highest ranking woman in the Chinese government.  And she was coming to Washington.  And I had worked with her as Secretary of State.  She asked if she could see me, and I said of course, I'd be happy to see her.
 
And then she said, "You know, could you do an event with me about early childhood?"  I said, "Oh, certainly, what is it about early childhood that has you so interested?"
 
Here's what she said, and then we did the event.  We did the event at the Brookings Institute in Washington.  China's making a huge commitment to early childhood and to pre-kindergarten.  Why?  They look at the same brain research.  In fact they have asked the American Nobel Prize winning economist from the University of Chicago, hardly a hotbed of radical liberalism -- (laughter) -- to be their consultant, among others, because he did the study which proved that early childhood investing by a country is one of the best returns on investment that we can make.  (Applause.)  So the Chinese are using an American expert for that.  So if I hadn't been excited before, I got really motivated about this. 
 
But unfortunately, we're hearing something different from Republican leaders in Washington.  Republicans aren't just missing the boat on early childhood education, they're trying to sink it.  Their budget puts at risk one of the most effective investments for our youngest children, Early Head Start.
 
Did they cut subsidies to oil companies?  No.  Did they cut tax loopholes like carried interest for hedge fund managers?  No.  The Republicans took care of those at the top and went after the kids.
 
Now, I believe getting off to a good start should be our children's birthright, part of the basic bargain that we have with each other as a nation.  Every child should have the tools and the skills to thrive in tomorrow's economy, especially those kids from our most vulnerable and at-risk communities.
 
And we need to make sure that parents can get good jobs and stay in the workforce.  That drives the economic engine.  So we have to do more to help them deal with the most difficult of the decisions of parents for young children to stay in the workforce.
 
I believe the time has come to make preschool and quality childcare available to every child in America.  If our families are going to be strong and our economy is going to thrive, all our kids need the chance to get off to the best possible start.  (Applause.)
 
I will work with states and communities across America to make sure that in the next 10 years every four year old in America has access to high quality preschool.  Now, already governors and state legislatures across the country are discovering the value of preschool.  And this is bipartisan. 
 
You know, one of the states with a universal pre-k program in America is Oklahoma, about as red a state as you can get.  But they have figured it out, the government and business leaders and families like, that this is a smart investment for them.
 
 
And we have to build on the momentum started by the states.  Now, look how far here in New Hampshire you've come.  Nearly 20 years ago, back when Senator Jeanne Shaheen was Governor Shaheen, she delivered funding for public kindergarten for the first time in the state's history.  (Applause.)
 
That then allowed the conversation to move where it is today with Governor Maggie Hassan supporting efforts for full day kindergarten and innovative pre-k partnerships.
 
So you start and you get what you have achieved on kindergarten, then you move toward full day, and then innovative pre-k.
 
All across the country we need to be doing that, and we also need to invest in childcare, because if you only start at four, the brain research shows that 80 percent of your brain has developed by the age of three.  Now, the good news is that leaves 20 percent to keep working on.  (Laughter.)  But it is a fact that by three many of our kids have already had most of the brain development that they're going to get.
 
And in this campaign I'll offer a comprehensive agenda to ensure that every child in America has access to quality, affordable childcare.  (Applause.)
 
I will propose a middle class tax cut to help parents deal with rising childcare costs.  (Cheers, applause.)
 
And I'll lead an effort to expand childcare opportunities and to make sure that programs address both the needs of working parents and the needs of children.
 
We shouldn't think of childcare as just a place to deposit your kids, a warehouse.  We should invest in programs that create healthy environments for early learning.
 
And to make sure that parents get the support they need from the time their children are infants, I will double the Early Head Start Childcare Partnership grant program, which brings head starts, evidence-based curriculum into the childcare setting, to provide comprehensive, full day, high quality services to low income families, and I will double our investment in Early Head Start itself, a program I helped to create when I was First Lady.  (Applause.)  And we know it's making a difference because we actually have evidence that shows it's making a difference.
 
And this is part, as I said, of a long term commitment of mine going back to my Methodist Church where I was raised and babysitting children of Mexican migrant farmworkers, through my years at the Children's Defense Fund working to expand opportunities for kids with disabilities, and through my time in the White House with my husband and in the Senate in New York and even as Secretary of State, because I have learned that talent is universal but opportunity is not.  (Applause.)
 
And I look sometimes in the eyes of kids who've had a really tough set of obstacles to overcome and they're doing the best they can.  And we need to do what we can do to help them succeed.
 
But every baby comes into this world with so much God-given potential.  And when they leave the hospital, some will have every opportunity their family can give them, and others will struggle.
 
Now, as you may have heard, I am a new grandmother.  (Laughter, applause.)  And so for me this has become really personal.  I remember being in the hospital waiting for Charlotte's arrival and talking to the nurses there.  And what did they want to talk to me about?  They wanted to talk to me about how hard it was for them, plus a lot of their patients, to get childcare.  How it was especially hard when they had to work the night shift.  How they had to keep juggling everything all the time.
 
And it was here at one of the great moments of my life a reminder that there are so many hardworking, conscientious people who deserve more help than they're getting right now.  And it needs to be a partnership, just like this Y is a partnership, a partnership between the public and private interests, a partnership where people feel that they can contribute and participate.
 
I think if we come together and take this on as a true national mission we can unlock the potential of all our children and further the potential of our country.  And our country then will be more inclusive, not leaving people behind and out, and where a father can tell his daughter "you can grow up to be anything you want, including President of the United States."  (Cheers/applause.)
 
